# Analyzing DNA Metabarcoding Data Generated using Oxford Nanopore Sequencing
May 2025
Luke McCartin - Postdoc - Lehigh University in the Herrera Lab

# Background
## DNA Metabarcoding

DNA metabarcoding involves amplifying a variable and taxonomically diagnostic region of a gene (a barcode) with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in DNA isolated from a sample. Typically, the samples that would be interesting to analyze with DNA metabarcoding include mixed communities of organisms. Two examples of samples commonly analyzed with metabarcoding include the microbiomes of plant and animal tissues and environmental samples. The analysis of DNA from environmental samples is referred to as environmental DNA, or eDNA, and these samples can include water, sediment, and even more recently, air (Taberlet, 2018; Lynggaard et al., 2022). 

During DNA metabarcoding library preparation, PCR primers can be used that amplify sequences from a taxonomically diverse suite of organisms (e.g. many eukaryotic groups including protists and invertebrate animals with 18S-v9 primers) or specific taxonomic groups (e.g. fish environmental DNA with 12S rRNA “MiFish” primers) (Amaral-Zettler, 2009; Miya et al., 2015). 

In a ‘two-step’ metabarcoding library preparation, first the barcode of interest is amplified with PCR using the primers that complement sequences that flank the DNA barcode. The PCR primers also include an overhanging sequence that is referred to as a linking adapter in this tutorial. In the second step, PCR primers that contain the linking adapter sequence, a unique index for each sample (sometimes called a tag), and the sequencing adapters are incorporated into the first PCR product using another round of PCR (Bohmann et al., 2022). These second PCR products undergo size selection to remove unwanted sequences that are shorter or longer than the barcode of interest. Finally, the PCR products from all samples are pooled together (multiplexed) and sequenced, most commonly on an Illumina platform but also on PacBio and Oxford Nanopore platforms. After sequencing, the sequencing reads are reassigned to the samples they originated from based on their unique combination of indices in a process referred to as demultiplexing. This step is typically conducted by the sequencing facility using software dedicated to the sequencing instrument.

Once you receive your metabarcoding data, bioinformatic processing typically first involves trimming primer and adapter sequences from the reads. In the case of Nanopore data, you’ll also need to reorient your sequencing reads so that they are in the 5’ to 3’ direction in the forward direction (i.e. with the sequence complementary to your forward primer at the beginning of the read). After this, the data are filtered for quality and then clustered and/or error-corrected infer ‘real’ biological sequences from the data that do not contain sequencing errors. The typical outputs of these processes are a file with the biologically accurate barcode sequences, a table with the taxonomic identity of these barcodes, and a table of their frequencies in each sample. Once you have generated these outputs, you can start to ask questions about the composition of organisms in the samples based on their distributions across the samples. Typically, metabarcoding is used to compare the composition of organisms across sampling sites, species, and environmental factors. There are a number of statistical tests developed specifically for metabarcoding data that complement these analyses.
